>> This is "Nuevo."
Dr. Michio Kaku, one of the
brightest man of the world,
a privileged mind of our time.
This is an exclusive
interview that we
had with Dr. Kaku
recently in Barcelona.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Gaia presents "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussan.
>> Dr. Michio Kaku was recently
invited to the Ufology World
Congress in Barcelona.
For the first time,
this bright scientist
accepted to participate
in an event like this.
Everyone was really
curious to know what
he was going to talk about.
I have this chance to
have this interview,
and to ask him why finally
he was participating
in a conference like this.
The answers were surprising.
And I feel you're going
to enjoy this interview.
Because she's going to tell
us how the new future is going
to be, what is going to
happen with the human being,
and so on.
This is an exclusive
interview of "Nuevo,"
and I hope you will enjoy it.
Thank you very much Dr. Kaku.
It's a pleasure to
be here with you.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Why did you accept to
participate in a conference
like this?
>> Well, I'm a physicist.
We believe in things that
are testable, reproducible,
and falsifiable.
Now the tide has turned, because
traditionally, scientists
would giggle and laugh talking
about flying saucers and UFOs.
The burden of proof
was on the believers--
prove it, give me the
evidence, show me.
Now the burden of proof has
shifted to the government
and the military.
Now they have to prove that
these sightings are not
from outer space and
another civilization.
Several things have happened.
First we have
videotapes, videotapes
taken by United States Navy
pilots that are testable.
We can now see and
calculate how fast
they move, how fast they can
zigzag, what is the altitude.
We know the parameters
of these objects now.
We didn't have that before.
And so this means that the
burden of proof has shifted.
Now the military,
the government,
has to prove that they are
not from another planet.
Now, they still might be
hypersonic test vehicles.
Russia, the United States,
and China, all three countries
are experimenting with
hypersonic vehicles.
But that's a big question mark.
The other possibility
is that-- who knows--
maybe they are
evidence of visitation.
>> All this evidence
of visitation,
what do you think of it?
>> I think we have to be
open to the possibility.
Because of the fact that
we have now discovered
4,000 exoplanets
orbiting other stars.
On average-- tonight, when you
look in the sky, on average,
every single star has a
planet going around it.
And in fact, in the galaxy,
we can now do a census.
We now realize that there are
over a billion planets that are
Earth-like in our own backyard.
So to assume that we
are the only ones,
I think, is a bit presumptuous,
when there are literally
billions of Earth-like
planets orbiting other stars.
That's also a game-changer.
So I think the tightest turn--
now people are open to the
idea that, yes, maybe there
are civilizations in space.
After all, the universe is
13.8 billion years old--
13.8 billion years old.
How old is science?
Science is 300 years old.
>> Well, if you consider
from Galileo to now.
>> That's right.
300 years ago, we
were all peasants,
and we believed in books
rather than doing experiments
on the universe.
So we have to be
open to technologies
beyond the conventional realm.
>> Can we learn from them
if we start to study them?
>> Well, we physicists
have seriously analyzed
the possibility of intelligence
throughout the universe.
How did we become
intelligent, for example?
We have eyes.
We have thumbs and
grasping ability.
And we have a vocabulary, we
have voice, we have language.
Those are the three
ingredients for intelligence.
Now, look at the Earth today,
the animals of the planet
Earth.
How many of them
have good eyesight,
opposable thumb or a tentacle,
and a large vocabulary?
We're the only ones.
However, in outer
space, Why can't we
have alien
civilizations that also
have good eyesight,
good grasping ability,
and a language?
That is the
prerequisite to create
an intelligent civilization.
>> You mentioned the
number of planets that have
the possibility.
According to
National Geographic,
it could be 40 billion planets
that could be like Earth.
And these really could harbor
many civilizations out there.
>> That's right.
Realize that, since the universe
is 13.8 billion years old,
civilizations could have
risen and fallen many times
in the past, and we
wouldn't even know about it.
That's how primitive we are.
Now, I have friends
of mine, physicists,
who search for signals
from outer space,
but it's very primitive.
We looked at radio signals.
But maybe civilizations
don't use radio.
Maybe for us, radio is
old-fashioned already.
But that's what we look for.
And so we realize
that we're just
beginning to confront the
possibility that there
are intelligent
civilizations out there.
>> Well, there are other signs
that have been discovered
recently, like the Tabby's
star, like these probably huge
structures around
some other stars.
It looks like now we have three
different examples of that.
>> That's right.
And we have to realize that
civilizations in the future
could be type 1,
type 2, or type 3.
They could be type 1, planetary.
They control the
weather, they control
volcanoes and the oceans.
That's type 1.
Type 2 controls a star,
like which you mentioned.
Perhaps they can cover
their entire star,
and use that as
an energy source.
That's type 2.
Then there's type 3, a
civilization which is galactic,
which is several thousand years
more advanced than us, that
roam the galactic space lanes.
So if these evidence
of visitation
is from an extraterrestrial
civilization,
they could be type 3.
That is, galactic.
They play with black holes.
They roam the
galactic space lanes.
And they could be eternal.
>> Immortality is something
that we scientists are looking
at even today, two types of
immortality that perhaps aliens
may have.
One is digital immortality,
to digitize everything
known about us, to create a copy
of us that is totally digital.
I would love, for example,
to talk to Einstein.
Everything known about him
can be digitized-- his books,
diaries, videotapes, lectures.
Everything can be digitized.
I would love an
opportunity to talk to him.
Then there is
genetic immortality.
We are now isolating the genes
that control the aging process.
What is aging?
Aging is the build up of
errors, mistakes in our DNA
they build up with time.
That's why we get old.
That's why we die.
But now we have
genetic engineering
to fix many of these mistakes.
And so genetic immortality may
be possible, perhaps sometime
in this century.
>> And also the Kardashev
is telling us that these--
how you call it, they call
the levels of society.
>> Right, the Kardashev
classification.
>> They mention that probably
the most difficult is to go
from civilization type 0, like
we are, to civilization type 1,
especially because of
interest in the oil industry,
in the oil, in the fossil fuels.
>> Right.
We realize that we are type 0.
We do not play with the weather.
We don't play with stars.
We don't play with galaxies.
We use oil and coal as
our main energy supply.
But we are about 100 years
from becoming type 1.
What is the internet?
The internet is the first
planetary type 1 technology
to fall into our
century by accident.
English and Mandarin Chinese
are the two dominant languages
on the internet.
Planetary languages
are being formed.
Planetary sports-- soccer,
football, the Olympics,
planetary sports.
Planetary music-- rock and roll.
Planetary fashion--
Chanel and Gucci.
So we're beginning to see
the beginning of a planetary
culture emerging.
And by 2100, we will become
a planetary civilization.
But I think that if
we are ever visited
by another civilization,
they will probably be type 3.
Now, why do I believe that?
When you talk to most
scientists about flying saucers,
they laugh.
They giggle.
Because the distances between
stars is so great, they say.
It would take thousands of years
for them to go from one planet
to another.
But you see, that assumes
that they're type 1.
That assumes that they have
anti-matter, fusion-type
rockets, very old-fashioned.
But if they're a few
thousand years ahead of us,
a million years ahead of us--
that's the blink of an eye
in the age of the galaxy--
then perhaps they have new ways
of going across the universe.
>> That's traveling faster
than the speed of light.
>> Well, we have something
called the Planck energy
the Planck energy is the energy
of the stability of space
and time itself.
Space and time
become unstable when
you go to the Planck energy.
We have, in Geneva, the
Large Hadron Collider.
The Planck energy is a
quadrillion times greater
than the Large Hadron Collider.
And if you could attain
the Planck energy,
you can create shortcuts--
perhaps shortcuts
through space and time.
In other words, go faster
than the speed of light
using Einstein's own equations.
>> It means the so-called
wormholes could be a reality?
>> That's right.
In 1935, it was Einstein
himself who first introduced
the concept of the wormhole.
He took two black
hole solutions,
stuck them together to create
a gateway between them.
And that became
the first wormhole.
And that's like Alice's looking
glass in "Alice in Wonderland."
When Alice had a looking
glass, and she put her hand
through the looking glass, her
hand went from Oxford, England,
to Wonderland.
That is a wormhole.
And it is a solution of
Einstein's equations.
And a type 3 civilization
may have access
to the Planck energy,
in which case, they
may be able to use
this as a technology.
>> In January 20, 2005, there
was a huge solar explosion from
the sun.
And the protons-- the
matter from the sun
came to Earth in
just eight minutes.
The scientists wonder if
there were some portals
between the sun and the earth.
And as we understand,
it was proven by 2008
that they really existed.
>> Well, we do know that if the
sun were to explode right now,
it would take eight minutes
for us to realize that,
because gravity travels
at the speed of light.
We know that now we have
gravity wave detectors, first
predicted by Einstein in 1916.
We now measure it.
Gravity travels at
the speed of light.
Then the question is,
are there anomalies there
in the fabric of space and time?
We now know that when light
goes around a galaxy, it bends.
Light can actually bend.
Because space itself
bends around a galaxy.
So space is not
uniform and flat.
We now know that space and time
is like a river, a river that
can bend, and twist, and turn
as it goes across the heavens.
And so we now realize
that Einstein's equations
had more surprises than
we originally thought.
>> One of them is this
possibility that it could be
something else besides
the relativity.
>> In fact, Einstein
didn't go far enough.
I work in something called
string theory, where
we believe in higher dimensions
beyond length, width,
and height.
We think of a
three-dimensional world
where we can move freely
in three dimensions.
But why not four, five, six?
Why not hyperspace?
Well, in physics, we do
believe that there could
be up to perhaps 11 dimensions.
I work in something called
string theory, which
we think will allow us
to have a theory that
goes beyond Einstein.
Einstein's equations break down
at the instant of the big bang
and the center of a black hole.
To go beyond a black hole, to
go through creation itself,
requires a higher theory.
And that's string theory.
And string theory
says that we could
exist in a higher
dimension, perhaps
11-dimensional hyperspace.
>> Is that possible?
>> Oh, yeah.
In fact, that's the dominant
theory in theoretical physics,
that there are other
dimensions out there.
Something that used to be
considered a crackpot idea
is now mainstream physics.
>> This string theory
is your theory.
I mean, you have become one
of the main experts on this.
>> Yeah, I'm one of the
co-founders of string field
theory, one of the main
branches of string theory.
And we think that
it is the solution
to Einstein's famous question--
can we read the mind of God?
Is there a God
equation, one equation
that goes beyond relativity,
beyond the quantum theory, that
unifies everything into one
consistent, coherent theory?
And we think that
is string theory.
>> Your last book--
one of you last books,
"The Future of Humanity,"
can you tell us
about that, please?
>> Yes.
We now realize
that, perhaps, when
we become a type 1 civilization,
we will go to the stars.
We will have fusion engines,
maybe antimatter engines,
with the ability to go
to the nearby stars.
But that's just 10, 20 light
years from the planet Earth.
But I think, in
the next century,
we will have the
first starships.
Now, once we become
type 2, then there's
a possibility of going beyond,
into the galaxy itself.
And I think it's inevitable
that we will have to do this.
You see, the dinosaurs did
not have a space program.
That's why they're
not here today.
How come there are no
dinosaurs here today?
They had no space program.
We have a space program, which
means we need an insurance
policy, plan B. Just
in case something bad
happens on the planet Earth,
it's good to have a settlement.
And we will be on the
moon starting next year.
We're going to orbit the moon
with the SLS booster rocket.
By mid-decade, we'll be on
the moon, and by 15 years,
we hope to be on Mars.
And so that's just the beginning
of a type 1 civilization.
And imagine by the
time we're type 2,
we will have colonized
the entire solar system,
and even beyond to
nearby solar systems.
>> What are the challenges
to colonize Mars?
>> Well, one of the
problems is cost.
But costs are dropping.
For example, if you take
a car ride from your home
to work, and then
you junk your car,
cars would be very
expensive-- one ride, one car.
That's rocketry today.
We only use rockets
once, just once.
We junk them.
What a waste of money.
That's why we reuse cars.
And now reusable rockets
are coming into play.
It costs $10,000 to
put a pound of anything
in orbit around
the planet Earth.
Take a book.
It weighs about a pound.
Put it in outer space,
how much does it cost?
$10,000 a pound.
Now, that's your weight in gold.
Think of your body
made out of gold.
That's what it costs to put
you in orbit around the Earth.
To go to the moon is
about $100,000 a pound.
To put you on Mars is about
a million dollars a pound.
But once we have
reusable rockets,
once we decrease the
cost of space travel,
then perhaps these costs
will drop to the point
where families can
go into outer space.
I believe that our grandkids,
they may honeymoon on the moon.
They may consider the
moon a great place
to have a honeymoon.
And on Mars-- yeah, by
the end of this century,
we will have a permanent
settlement on Mars.
>> Well, they are planning to
have our hotel around the Earth
by 2025.
Is that possible?
>> Oh, yeah.
It's possible.
It's a question of cost.
We have to bring the cost down.
It's an engineering problem.
The basic physics was worked
out during World War II.
So it's a question of
engineering and cost
to make it safe, and make it
affordable for mom and dad.
>> And is the moon
going to be habitable?
>> Well, in principle, yes.
But there's not much
on the moon that we
can use to live off the land.
You see, the early pioneers
were able to live off the land.
They could plant crops.
They could shoot game.
They could live off the land.
They didn't have to bring water.
They didn't have to bring air.
They didn't have to
bring soil with them
when they came to a new world.
On Mars, we do.
So we have to create a
self-sustaining colony.
One way to do this is to have
satellites go around Mars
to heat up the ice caps.
The ice caps have
plenty of water.
Mars once had oceans,
rivers, lakes,
almost a tropical
environment, practically.
By beaming energy from
the sun onto the icecaps,
we can melt the
ice caps, and water
will flow on Mars once again.
>> What happened in Mars?
What happened?
They say now that it was like
some billions of years ago.
>> In fact, Mars was
tropical before the Earth.
Mars cooled off
before the Earth.
Some people think that maybe
DNA got off the ground on Mars
first, because it
cooled off first.
>> We are martians probably.
>> We are the Martians, right?
So what we have to
do is several things.
First of all, once we're on
Mars, we have to have energy.
We'll get that from sunlight.
We have to create
genetically modified
algae to thrive in a carbon
dioxide cold environment.
So genetically
engineered plants,
algae, to thrive in this
environment of the planet Mars,
to create crops so we can eat.
>> Like in "The Martian"?
>> Like in the movie,
"The Martian," right.
>> Is that possible?
Are we going to do it?
Are you looking at Mars as the
next house for human beings?
>> It's definitely possible.
However, cost, again, is
going to be a problem.
One of the things about
cost is that the asteroids
may be the stepping
stone for colonization.
For example, years ago,
when Thomas Jefferson
negotiated with Napoleon
to buy the mid half of what
became the United
States, Thomas Jefferson
thought that it would
take 1,000 years--
1,000 years to
colonize the Midwest.
It took a few decades.
Why?
The Gold Rush.
In 1848, gold was
discovered in California,
and instead of
taking 1,000 years
to colonize the United States,
it took us a few decades.
There's a new gold
rush because asteroids
have platinum and rare earth
elements in large quantities.
You see, when the Earth was
molten billions of years ago,
many of the rare elements sunk
to the center of the Earth.
So the crust does not have too
much of these very valuable
elements.
Asteroids never had that.
Therefore, asteroids
have more platinum,
more rare earth elements that
are commercially valuable.
One large asteroid can
pay for space program.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
That's how much platinum-based
materials and rare earth
there are.
>> I even heard that there
was one asteroid with gold.
It was made of gold.
Is that true?
>> Well, possibly.
We have a planet in
outer space that we
discovered that has diamonds.
It turns out that
carbon is in very hot
form sufficient to create a
planet made out of diamonds.
>> However it's far away.
>> Very far away, right?
>> Do you think, then, the
future of humanity is safe?
Because now we are looking
to the climate change,
we are looking to the population
growth, the scarce quantity
of food, the elements.
>> Well, I don't think we should
go to Mars and the universe
to escape the problems
of the planet Earth.
We are earthlings.
This is going to
be our home planet
for many thousands of years.
So we have to use our own
intelligence on the earth
to solve Earth-like problems.
I think we should go to
Mars as an insurance policy,
to spread our wings,
to see what's out there
in the universe, not necessarily
to settle the entire universe--
that would be very,
very expensive--
but to begin the
process of creating
a settlement on another world.
>> Are you optimistic
about this?
I mean, will human being learn
about all these mistakes,
and solve the problems
in the future?
>> Well, I would hope so.
You mentioned
overpopulation, right?
We realize that, every
few years, United Nations
projects the population
of the future.
And it gets more and more
reasonable every year.
Why?
Because when nations
get old, like Japan,
they have fewer children.
The population of Japan
is contracting now.
By mid-century, it'll lose
about a million people per year
according to the latest
projections in Japan.
Europe is next.
Germany, Austria,
Switzerland-- populations
are not growing as fast
as we once projected.
Why?
Because people are richer.
When you're richer,
you live longer,
you have fewer children.
And so the population explosion
never happened in Japan.
And it's going backwards.
China is beginning to
experience the same problem.
So overpopulation is a
problem, but it's not as big
as we thought.
>> And what about
the climate change?
What about the fossil
fuels and the burning?
Now are very rewarded
because the whole world
seems to be in flames.
>> Global warming is real.
It's not science fiction.
We measure with our satellites.
Every glacier is
receding on the planet
Earth, every major glacier.
All the indicators
are pointing up--
more forest fires, more
floods, more extreme weather.
All the indicators point up.
But there is some good news.
Why don't we have solar power
and wind power everywhere?
We've made inroads, especially
in Europe, with wind power.
But why don't we have all of it
with sun power and wind power?
The problem is
not wind or solar.
The problem is storage.
Everyone forgets
this-- the battery.
The battery does not
obey Moore's law.
Moore's Law says computers
double in power every 18
months.
That's computers.
Solar cells do
not become cheaper
by half every 18 months.
But now inventors are
creating the superbattery,
superbatteries that can
make power generation when
the sun doesn't shine
and the winds don't blow.
That could easily double the
efficiency of solar and wind.
And so now inventors
are concentrating
on creating batteries which
can store this energy when
the sun doesn't shine
and the winds don't blow.
Plus, on a scale now of decades,
fusion power is a possibility.
In southern France,
Cadarache, France,
the European Union is betting
on the ITER hydrogen fusion
reactor.
That would mean that, one day,
seawater would give us energy
forever.
>> And the batteries?
>> Yeah, so the
batteries are coming.
Realize that battery efficiency
is increasing every year.
Prices for batteries have
dropped, efficiency is up.
And it means that with
superbatteries, we'll
be able to even out
the energy cycle.
For example, utilities
have to prepare
for peak summer, peak winter.
That's when people want power--
peak winter, peak summer.
And you cannot store
electrical energy very well.
With a superbattery, you can
even out the energy cycle.
So the energy cycle
does not look like this,
it becomes much flatter.
And you can save a tremendous
amount of money with utilities.
So the utilities are very much
interested in the superbattery.
>> And what about trash?
What about plastics?
What about plastics on the sea?
Do you see any solution there?
Are we going to leave these
behind for other generations?
>> Well, I think we should,
one, pass legislation so that
nations have to be responsible
for the garbage they create.
But two, let market
forces kick into play,
that objects should include
the price of disposal.
When you buy
something, you're not
paying for the
price for disposal.
You're just paying for
the manufacturing cost.
>> Exactly.
>> Right.
So we may have to
tax certain products,
so that we can,
from the tax money,
pay for the cleanup operation.
And that would
allow market forces
to drive down the cost of waste.
>> Recycle?
>> Yeah, recycling,
government regulation,
plus the market
forces, by taxing,
by putting more taxes to
include the cost of disposal.
>> What about the
conscience of the people?
>> Well, that's a slow process.
You see, democracies do not
work in a straight line.
Democracies depend upon
an educated population.
And it takes time
to educate people.
It takes time and effort.
But I think it's happening.
I think people are aware that
global warming is a problem.
They are aware that we
have limited resources
on the planet Earth.
I think that things
have changed.
>> And what about something
that really worries us,
that is the extinction of life--
I mean, animals and species.
What is happening
around the world?
>> Well, many people
believe that, in the past,
perhaps there was a comet or a
meteor that wiped out diversity
on the planet Earth.
Some people think
that a new comet has
hit the earth, called humans.
That is, you and me,
we are the new comet
that has hit the earth.
And it means that life forms
are disappearing on the planet.
Now, that's very
dangerous, because we are
at the top of the food chain.
Here is the food chain,
starting with the oceans,
going all the way to the top.
We're at the very top.
Now, if the food chain
were destabilized,
it wouldn't take much for us
to fall off the food chain.
For example, look
at cereal crops.
How many cereals do we eat?
Corn, wheat, rye,
just a handful.
But if there is a
disease, a blight,
which affects corn
or wheat, you're
talking about mass starvation.
A rice blight could
affect all of Asia.
So we are so dependent
upon just a few crops
because we are at the
top of the food chain.
So we have to be more careful
about the world around us
that we pollute.
>> You talk about a
comet and meteorites.
Just recently we
have found that there
were many different asteroids
coming to Earth, just
in the last month, two
months, July and August.
Now the European
Space Agency and NASA
are talking about
joining efforts
to do something about it.
Are we in really a real danger?
>> Well, not in any
immediate danger.
However, we have to realize
that the threat is real.
We now realize that,
when rocks come
in from outer space, deep
space, they hit the earth,
sometimes they explode with
the power of an atomic bomb.
Now, we didn't know this,
because we don't register--
we don't measure
things happening
way up there in outer space.
But now we do.
And we found what
are called bolides.
Bolides are rocks that explode
way up in the upper atmosphere.
And they explode with the
power of an atomic bomb.
So this is serious.
Now, they don't reach
the surface of the earth,
because they vaporize
way up in space.
But it means that they're
more common than we thought.
Now, Near-Earth Object,
NEO, Near-Earth Objects,
we now realize that there
are thousands of them.
And we track them.
The military tracks
all these thousands
of Near-Earth Objects, but
we don't get all of them.
And we basically look at them
larger than a soccer field.
If an object is larger
than a football field,
we can monitor it.
Smaller than a football
field, we don't, which
means that there could be
thousands of objects that
are the size of an
apartment building
that could hit the earth
and destroy an entire city.
Now, a city-buster that
could hit the earth
and wipe out London,
New York, or Moscow,
hits the Earth about
once every 100 years.
We've had two of them
now hitting Russia.
>> In Chelyabinsk, yes.
>> So two of them hit Russia
within the last 100 years.
So we expect that, on
average, a city-buster
hits the planet Earth.
On average of a
few thousand years,
we have a nation-buster,
like Apophis.
Apophis is an asteroid
about 1,000 feet across.
And it could destroy England
if it were to hit England.
And that's a nation-buster.
Every 10 million years,
there's a planet-buster,
like what hit Mexico
65 million years ago.
So we have to realize that it's
a crapshoot, it's a gamble.
We're gambling with
objects in outer space.
We track the big ones.
But the little ones,
we don't track.
And it means that we could
be caught totally unprepared,
like we were just
this year, when
an object with a force
of 10 atomic bombs
came right by the planet Earth.
>> On July 23?
>> Around that time.
Right, in fact, two
of them, not just one.
>> Yes, and now
there's another one.
>> Yeah.
So we now realize that
we are more in danger
than we previously thought.
But on average, once every 100
years, one of the big ones,
about the size of an apartment
building, hits the Earth.
>> Will be able to do
something about Apophis?
it's coming.
I mean, it's just 10 years away.
>> Yeah, the answer is no.
We are sitting ducks.
We are defenseless,
totally helpless.
Let's say, right now,
some amateur astronomer
sees an object bigger
than an apartment building
headed to the planet Earth.
What could we do?
The answer is nothing.
Absolutely nothing.
We have no space shuttle.
We have no rockets that could
easily reach deep space.
We don't know the physics.
Is the rocket going to
blow up the asteroid?
We have a lot of
small asteroids.
We don't know about the
physics of these things.
So we are children.
We're children when it comes
to threats from outer space.
>> However, humanity
feels like, when it comes,
we are going to do
something about it.
>> That's the movie.
Everyone expects Bruce Willis
to jump into the space shuttle.
But A, there's no
more space shuttle.
B, there's no replacement
for the space shuttle.
C, we have no rockets capable
of reaching deep space
on a moment's notice.
>> Are you afraid of Apophis?
>> Well, the latest
projection of Apophis,
which is an asteroid
about 1,000 feet across,
shows that it will probably
miss the first time around,
about 2029.
However, on the second pass,
that's when all bets are off.
Because on the first
pass, it's going
to go through the atmosphere.
And we cannot
predict accurately,
using Newton's laws, what
happens when an asteroid goes
through the air very well.
So we don't know,
on the second pass,
if it will hit the Earth
or not-- big question mark.
>> Are you afraid?
You think-- because I am.
[BOTH CHUCKLE]
>> I think, after
the first pass,
then we will have
numbers to work with.
But I think that,
in the meantime,
we should seriously think
about the possibility
of one day doing something
if an object that big
were to come by.
Apophis is a nation-buster.
It could take out England
if it were to hit the Earth.
>> Well, after 2029, before
it comes 2036, the same day,
April 13, we will have
the time to do something.
Because then is when
we are going to say,
we have to do something now.
Or it's going to be panic
in the whole planet.
>> Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
Now, some people say,
why not simply nuke it
with a nuclear weapon?
That could make it worse.
Because instead of one bomb--
instead of one asteroid,
you may have five
or six asteroids--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Right.
So right now, like I
said, we are defenseless.
We're clueless.
We don't know what to do.
We're caught with
our pants down.
>> Well, I hope we will
find something to do,
because it's really scary.
But probably it's going to make
people think more about it,
and put more money into it.
>> Right.
You see, most of us spend our
lives looking at the ground.
We spend all our lives
looking at the floor.
Very rarely do we look
up to see that there's
a universe up there.
There's a whole universe
having its cycles and motions,
independent of us humans.
And so we have to
look up sometimes.
>> To come back to the
beginning of this interview,
about the UFOs, are you excited
of what is happening now with
the American government?
>> Yeah, I think it's exciting.
Because what's happening
now is that people
are realizing that we're
reaching critical mass.
So many sightings,
so many videotapes,
so many eyewitness
accounts are accumulating.
And the fact that
we realize that,
hey, maybe, just maybe,
there is something there.
And in fact, scientists
are now saying
that because so
many planets have
been discovered, that one day we
will find a twin of the Earth.
That's the holy grail-- the twin
of the Earth in outer space.
And so maybe they have
lifeforms on them.
And so all these are questions
that were around for decades.
But now the tide has shifted.
Now, like I said,
the burden of proof
is no longer on the
believers to prove that there
are extraterrestrials.
The burden of proof
is on the government
to prove that there are
not extraterrestrials.
>> It is time to invest on that?
>> I think so.
With a fraction of the money
we spend on a battleship,
we could definitely explore
the physics and the engineering
behind these things.
See, this is a question
of national security.
Why do we have armies?
Why do we have navies?
Why do we have air forces?
For security.
But what happens if we bump into
a civilization more advanced
than us?
That's a security question.
>> But it's difficult.
They do something to us,
they will have done
it long ago, I think.
>> Yeah, I think that's
an important point.
They could be dangerous.
They could be rapacious.
They may want to conquer us.
But I think not.
Because if they're
that advanced,
they've already been here.
They already decoded
our language.
They know our culture.
And as a consequence,
they haven't
bothered to take us over.
So I think, for the most part,
they're going to be peaceful.
Because what do we have
to offer them, gold?
I mean, for them,
gold could be useless.
It's just a yellow mineral.
That's all it is for them.
What do they want?
water?
There's plenty of
water in outer space.
What do they want?
There's nothing that
we have that they
can't get by going to Mars.
And the uninhabited
planet where there's
nobody to worry about,
plenty of resources
to plunder if they want.
And so we have
nothing to offer them
for them to want to conquer us.
>> If they are here,
why would they be here?
>> Well, we physicists have
looked into the question of how
to best explore the galaxy.
In the movie,
"2001," you remember
that there was, on the
moon, an object, an object
that scanned the solar system,
looking for intelligent life.
And it reproduced itself,
made copies of itself,
and shot into other
distant moons.
That is like a virus.
A virus is just
one molecule that
colonizes your entire
body in two weeks,
and you start to
sneeze and cough.
That's amazing.
So we shoot these viruses.
And these intelligent
civilizations
can shoot these viruses,
called von Neumann probes,
to reproduce on
moons, and to scatter
throughout the universe.
So in other words,
on our moon, there
could be an object left
over from a passing
type 3 civilization.
Because that's the
most efficient way
to explore the galaxy.
>> In your book, you mention
the possibility that probably
the visitors are not organic.
Probably they are
something else.
>> That's right.
We, as humans, may eventually
become part cybernetic
in the future.
We may actually merge with
some of our creations.
Now, realize that
some people think
that robots will
eventually become
so smart they'll take over.
Because they can
be made smarter,
and smarter, and smarter.
And we are humans.
We can't do that, OK.
At a certain point,
they may take over.
However, there's another,
third, possibility.
And the third possibility is
maybe we'll merge with them.
This is not going to
happen anytime soon,
maybe on a scale of
centuries into the future.
But that is an option.
Because once you're
part cybernetic,
you can become Superman.
You can live forever.
You can live on any
planet you want--
any gravity, any
atmospheric content.
You can live anywhere
in the universe
if you're part cybernetic.
And that could be the
future of the human race.
So when we meet an
intelligent civilization,
we should not be surprised
if they're part cybernetic.
>> Are you excited to
be living at this time?
>> I think, of all the eras
to be born in, this is perhaps
the most exciting.
Because we're at the cusp of
this rapid increase in science
and technology.
When I was a child, I used to
read about the solar system.
And we used to talk
about Mars and Martians,
talk about Saturn and Jupiter.
But we had never visited them.
They were a complete mystery.
Now we've been to
all the planets.
We have gorgeous photographs
of all these things.
But when I was a child, we knew
nothing, absolutely nothing,
about these planets
and what's out there.
So this, I think, is
one of the best times
to be alive, because we're
at the cusp of understanding
the universe.
>> You're an amazing person.
Why did you become
an astrophysicist?
>> Well, when I was
eight years old,
something happened
which changed my life.
The newspapers had a story.
A great scientist had died.
And they put a picture of
his desk on the front page.
The caption said, this is
the unfinished manuscript
of the greatest
scientist of our time.
So I was 8 years old.
I said, well, why couldn't
he finish this book?
What's so hard?
It's a homework problem, right?
Why didn't he ask his mother?
Well, I went to the
library, and I found out
this man was Albert Einstein.
And the book was "The
Theory of Everything."
He wanted the God equation,
one equation, 1 inch long,
that would allow us to
read the mind of God,
to unify all physical
laws into one equation.
So for me, this was greater
than any murder mystery.
This is greater than
any adventure story.
I had to know what
was in that book.
Why couldn't he finish it?
Well, today, that's
what I do for a living.
We think we have the theory,
the theory of everything,
string theory.
It's not in its final form,
but we're testing aspects of it
with the Large Hadron Collider.
The God particle was discovered
just a few years ago.
And we think that
this could be it.
We're hot on the trail of
the theory of everything.
>> Tell us more about that.
This is fascinating.
>> Well, we believe that,
well, why do we have electrons,
neutrons, protons?
Why do you have
so many particles?
Because they're
just rubber bands,
tiny rubber bands that
vibrate in a certain way.
This is an electron,
and this is a quark,
this is a gauge particle.
That's what we have so many.
So all the subatomic
particles are nothing
but musical notes on a string.
What is physics?
Physics is the
harmonies you can write
on these vibrating strings.
What is chemistry?
Chemistry is the melodies
that you can play
and all these vibrating strings?
What is the universe?
The universe is a
symphony of strings.
And then what is the mind of
God that Einstein spent 30 years
of his life chasing after?
The mind of God is cosmic music
resonating through hyperspace.
That is the mind of God.
>> And are you going to find it?
Are you going to
finish the book?
>> Well, that's what we hope.
We hope to finish it, dot
the i's and cross the t's.
We hope to finish.
We have the theory.
The theory is not quite
in its final form yet.
>> I heard that just
nanoseconds after the big bang,
it's when really God
manifested himself,
because everything is a
consequence of what is before.
>> Well, when I was a child, I
realized that my parents were
Buddhists.
But I was raised as a
Christian as a youth.
And they have two
different opinions
about the origin
of the universe.
Christianity says
there was a moment when
God said, let there be light.
In Buddhism is nirvana--
no beginning, no end,
just timeless nirvana.
Now we have a new theory,
called the multiverse,
which allows us to unify
two different pictures.
Our universe had a beginning.
Our universe is a bubble.
The bubble's expanding.
That's called the
Big Bang Theory.
But there are other bubbles
out there, other universes.
They pop into existence.
Maybe they disappear.
We have a bubble bath--
a bubble bath of baby universes.
Well, our universe is
one of these bubbles.
And so, yes, our universe had a
beginning, like the Bible says.
Our universe had a beginning.
But in nirvana,
its timelessness.
And that is the bubble bath.
So nirvana is the
hyperspace in which
bubbles form all the time.
And that is called
the multiverse theory,
which is now the dominant
theory in theoretical physics.
It means that big bangs
happen all the time.
It means that we can go
before the beginning.
We can go before the
instant of creation itself.
Now, Stephen Hawking,
my colleague,
said that he did not believe in
God because if the universe was
created instantly, there was
no time for God to create
the universe, because the
universe happened just
like that.
But you see, if
there's a multiverse,
and universes are
constantly being created,
there's plenty of time
to create a universe.
So I think Stephen was
wrong on this question.
>> Before we finish, I just
want your opinion on Avi Loeb,
what he found with 'Oumuamua.
Do you think this was
really a meteorite,
or was intelligent craft?
>> Well, we saw this object
coming in from outer space.
And using Newton's laws of
motion, we went backwards.
We tracked where it came from.
And we said, my God, it came
from outside the solar system.
We've never seen this before--
an object not within
Saturn and Jupiter's orbit,
but outside the
solar system itself.
And the orbit was eccentric.
It did not quite obey
Newton' laws of motion.
So maybe it was a rocket
ship, some people said.
Or maybe it was space dust.
That's why the orbit is
not quite exactly according
to Einstein prediction.
Well, it came and it left.
So we don't know.
All we do know is that the
universe is more mysterious
than we thought.
And visitors from
above the solar system
are more common than
we previously thought.
Outside our solar system--
who would have thought?
And it means that we are part
of a much larger universe.
We spend all our time thinking
about our solar system
and the Earth.
But there are other solar
system that can touch us.
Things from other solar systems
go right through our backyard
all the time.
And we were clueless
until recently.
>> Like the TRAPPIST system?
>> That's right.
All of a sudden, we
see systems with not
just one Earth-like
planet, but many planets
that are Earth-like.
Remember the movie, "Star Wars"?
There was a scene where Luke
Skywalker looked up in the sky,
and there were two suns.
Astronomers laughed.
They said, ha, stupid.
People don't realize
you can't have two suns.
The planet going around
would be unstable.
All the astronomers laughed.
Now we find triple star
systems, three-star systems.
In fact, the nearest star to the
earth is the Centauri system.
Proxima Centauri is the third
star of a triple-star system.
And it has a planet
going around it,
called Proxima B, which is the
closest planet to the planet
Earth that is Earth-like.
And so the creators of Star
Wars have the last laugh.
They were right,
astronomers were wrong.
>> Well, Dr. Kaku, thank you
very much for this interview.
On the name of all the
Spanish-speaking viewers,
thank you.
I think we have enjoyed
so much knowledge,
because you are a very
wise man, probably
the cleverest in the planet.
Thank you very much.
>> Thank you very much.
>> Thank you.
[CELESTIAL SOUND]
The burden of proof is now on
the side of the government.
Finally a great
scientist is recognizing
that this phenomenon is real.
Now the authorities hope to
demonstrate that this is not,
and that is going to be
very difficult, especially
with the kind of
proof we have now,
that it comes directly
from the authorities.
This is a new time,
a new beginning.
And I think Dr. Kaku set the
stage for the near future.
I hope you have
enjoyed this interview.
I will see you in the
next episode of "Nuevo."
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Gaia presented "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussan.